Now let's look at a few applications
in responsive design custom properties
are immensely useful in responsive design.
And it was one of the very
first use cases for
them it's a little bit difficult to
demonstrate this appropriately with
a small demo that is self
contained in a slide.
Because responsive design gets
exponentially more complex,
the more your website gets complex.
And we can't really see
a very complex website.
Because you won't be it will be
impossible to process all of
its code in the time space of a workshop.
So here is a very cut down
very simple example but
hopefully we can still see some of
the concepts and some of the strategies.
And you can apply these same
strategies to the problems that you
have already faced when you're
designing responsive layouts.
So, the most common way to
use custom properties for
responsive layouts is, is when.
We're using multiple
different measurements that
are actually governed by
the same measurement.
Like here, we have a gap that is
0.3 m's in the regular rate layout,
and 0.5 m's in the layout for
larger screens.
We can resize this from
the handle here to see it adapt.
There's a bunch of things that adapt.
So the gap adapts,
the grid becomes a single column grid and
the font size changes
slightly as well Right,
so, we have the spacing
change in both places,
the padding changes as well.
So essentially the padding that we have
even though this is pre-computed here.
What we actually wanted for
the padding was to have
a fixed amount plus
an amount that changes based on the gap.
So we could have actually
written it like this.
And then if we use a custom property for
the gap,
let's call it gutter,
then we can use that right here.
And notice that I said, you shouldn't be
setting custom properties right there and
then using them you should
instead use full box.
That's components that you
expect other people to style.
If it's your own layout, then it's fine
to set custom properties, obviously.
So we override the gutter here, and
that means we don't actually
need this rule anymore.
It just adopts.
So this is probably the most common
strategy that you've already used.
I imagine if you've
used custom properties,
you've already use them to override
custom properties in a media query.
And have the layout adapt this is probably
the one thing that people teach when
it comes to custom properties.
And responsive design but
it's not the only one.
So if we use that,
it means that we still have to hunt down
multiple places for
the value of a single property.
So, to make sense of what
our layout looks like,
we still need to look both in
the media query In the base style.
let's try a slightly different
approach with font size so
what we could do is we could have a font
size larger that is specified here.
And then in the media query
instead of setting it to 110%,
we can set it to font size larger.
That does keep the actual style
declaration in the media query, but
it means we can get an idea of both
values by just looking at one rule.
It keeps everything together in one room.
However, this also, this does mean that
if we need to adjust the base font size,
we would need to adjust it twice.
In some cases, that is not what we want.
In some cases,
what we want is a relative adjustment.
So in the larger layout, we don't
necessarily want it to be precisely 110%.
We may want it to be,
say 1.2 times the base font size.
So what can we do then?
We could define scaling
factors in our media queries.
And then we could write our CSS to account
for these optional scaling factors.
So we would write font size actually
we would use a color here and
then we would use our base font size.
Which we could use a variable for
as well but I'm not going to right now.
And then font size scale that
would this would default to one.
It's important to make a default one so
that these are truly optional.
And then all we said in the media query
is font size scale, which we make 1.2.
And then it just works as you can see.
Now, let's take a moment and try to
add a custom property for the columns.
So that we don't have all this
grid stuff in our media query.
Let's take a look.
So we can move this to the base rule.
The body rule And just use
the columns property.
And then this one as well just uses
the number of columns verbatim.
So we can just take this declaration and
move it here.
And use the actual columns value.
And now this one, we want this to be
two when the number of columns is 3.
And what do we want it to be when
the number of columns is one,
nothing really we wanted to be one.
However, the good thing is we can
just still specify columns and
put it here and it actually still works.
Sorry, not columns.
Columns- 1.
Yeah.
We wanna to be spanked too.
So it still works just fine,
when the colons are 3, but
even in the single column layout.
It works just fine because 0
is actually nonsensical there.
So, now we have it we eliminated
all these rules that we had
in the media query into just
overriding 3 custom properties.
So to recap, the second strategy
is to set all the values for
all your different media queries as
custom properties in the base rule.
And then you just use these
values in the media queries.
So you don't actually have to hunt
down in multiple media queries to see
what your style is.
In the third strategy,
this is specifically for
relative adjustments where your base CSS
multiplies by an optional scaling factor.
And media queries only set the scaling
factor and no actual values.
Note that these techniques are actually
useful every time you need to create
variations of a design.
Not just for responsive design.
Well, essentially responsive design
is just yet another variation.
For example, multipliers can be useful
when you have multiple instances of
a component with different content.
And you need to vary some of them.
In fact,
these very slides use a similar technique
to vary the font size of the live demos.
Like some demos that have a lot more code,
use a multiplier to make the font
size a little bit smaller.